How ServiceControl Retries Works improvements (#2507)
Particular/ServiceControl: docs/bulk-retries-design.md

When a retry batch is first created it has this state. This means that ServiceControl is finding and marking failed messages as belonging to this batch.

To do this, a new document is created for each failed message. Each one has an id `FailedMessageRetry/{messageId}` and contains the failed message id and the retry batch id. As only one document with this key can exist at a time, this ensures that a Failed Message can only ever belong to a single batch. This FailedMessageRetry document will exist until such a time as a new Failed Message with same Id comes through the error queue. This guarantees that there can only be one outstanding retry for a failed message at a time.

When all messages have been marked, a list of the `FailedMessageRetry` ids is appended to the batch and the batch changes status to `Staging`. The list inside of the Batch may contain failed messages which do not belong to this batch (because another batch claimed them in parallel). These will get filtered out during staging (below).

> When ServiceControl starts up it will attempt to adopt (what does adopt mean?) any batches that it finds in this status and move them to `Staging`. This can only happen if the ServiceControl process stops during the above process. Any documents that were already marked will be added to the batch. Any documents that had not yet been marked are ignored and will have to be retried again by the user. (<- what does this mean?) When ServiceControl starts up, it will generate a `Session ID` GUID. This GUID is stamped onto each new batch as it is created. This is how ServiceControl can tell if a batch is from a previous session and adopt it. Only Batches with a non-current session Id will be adopted by the orphan batch process.

Reviewer: > what does adopt mean?

We may be missing a concept here. When ServiceControl starts it will look for documents marked with a retry batch id, without a matching retry batch document. i.e. We started making the batch but we never completed it. We call retry batches in this state "orphaned" because the process that was assembling them has been lost.

When we "adopt" and orphaned batch, we take over the processing of it. We find all of the messages with the same missing retry batch id and create a retry batch with that id for them. This new retry batch document will then get picked up and processed like any other.

> Any documents that had not yet been marked are ignored and will have to be retried again by the user. (<- what does this mean?)

When you issue a bulk retry we start a background process that looks  for all of the messages that match your criteria and we assign them a retry batch id (in lots of 1000). If you kill the process before it is done, the details of what you were trying to retry are gone. Any documents we had already marked for retry will be retried. Any that were not marked for retry will require manual intervention to retry

> When ServiceControl starts up it will attempt to adopt (what does adopt mean?) any batches that it finds in this status and move them to `Staging`. This can only happen if the ServiceControl process stops during the above process. Any documents that were already marked will be added to the batch. Any documents that had not yet been marked are ignored and will have to be retried again by the user. (<- what does this mean?) When ServiceControl starts up, it will generate a `Session ID` GUID. This GUID is stamped onto each new batch as it is created. This is how ServiceControl can tell if a batch is from a previous session and adopt it. Only Batches with a non-current session Id will be adopted by the orphan batch process.

Author: ```suggestion
When ServiceControl starts up it will attempt to adopt any batches that it finds in this status and move them to `Staging`. This can only happen if the ServiceControl process stops during the above process. Any documents that were already marked will be added to the batch. Any documents that had not yet been marked are ignored and will have to be retried again by the user.

When a bulk retry is issued a background process is started that looks for all of the messages that match its criteria and assign them to a retry batch id (in lots of 1,000). If the process is killed before it is done, the details of what you were trying to retry are gone. Any documents that had already marked for retry will be retried. Any that were not marked for retry will require manual intervention to retry

When ServiceControl starts up, it will generate a `Session ID` GUID. This GUID is stamped onto each new batch as it is created. This is how ServiceControl can tell if a batch is from a previous session and adopt it. Only Batches with a non-current session Id will be adopted by the orphan batch process.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
## Recovering retry batches

When ServiceControl starts it will look for documents marked with a retry batch id, without a matching retry batch document (i.e. We started making the batch but we never completed it). Retry batches in this state as called "orphaned" because the process that was assembling them has been lost.

When we "adopt" and orphaned batch, we take over the processing of it. We find all of the messages with the same missing retry batch id and create a retry batch with that id for them. This new retry batch document will then get picked up and processed like any other.

TODO: How is selected which message is part of a retry batch? If that done before the retry batch is created (try to add 1,000 messages, if some are part of another retry batch just skip? Or b, the retry batch itself tried to create FailedMessageRetry documents until either no more messages or it reaches 1,000? Based on line 23 I think the last? )

> 
> TODO: Not very clear what "adoption" does and what unmarked message are being ignored means.

Author: ```suggestion
```

### Staging

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Staging ensures transactional exactly-once processing. Transports that do not support `SendsAtomicWithReceive` strictly would not need staging to prevent more-than-once delivery.
```

When a batch enters this state, it means that failed messages belonging to the batch are being added to a special `staging` queue. This queue is used during `Forwarding` to ensure that messages are sent back to their original destination transactionally (using the transports recieve transaction).

NOTE: Although multiple batches may be in `Staging` or `Forwarding` at a time, these are processed by a single thread ensuring that the rest of the process is serialized. This is important to ensure that only one batch at a time has access to the `staging` queue. Batches in `Staging` will only be processed if there are no batches in `Forwarding`.

> TODO: What value does the staging queue have when transaction mode is ReceiveOnly?

Reviewer: The staging queue typically hass a transaction mode of `SendsAtomicWithReceive` on any transport that supports it. For those that don't (ASQ, RabbitMQ, SQS) it doesn't provide a lot of value. Perhaps we could consider introducing an alternate retry mechanism for those.

Author: @mikeminutillo I've created https://github.com/Particular/ServiceControl/issues/2558

> TODO: What happens might forwarding a specific batch always keep failing?

Reviewer: If a message fails to be forwarded it is removed from the batch. If the batch contains no messages, then it is marked as complete.

When a batch is selected for staging a new `Staging Id` is generated for it and the list of failed messages belonging to the batch is loaded. At this time, if a message had been snagged by another batch, it gets filtered out.

> TODO: Aren't messages selected during the Marking stage?

Reviewer: Yes. They are.

I don't have the context of why this was introduced. It would require deeper analysis.

Author: @WilliamBZA might you know?

Reviewer 2: Probably something to do with not having a cutoff period when group retries were introduced. I'm not actually sure.

I do think the entire marking process needs an overhaul.

Reviewer 2: I do not know

Each message, one at a time, is dispatched to the `staging` queue. As each message is dispatched:

> 1. It's Raven document (which document, FailedMessageRetry?) is updated to reflect that it has entered `RetryIssued` mode.

Reviewer: No. The `Failedmessage` document.

When ServiceControl starts up it will attempt to adopt any batches that it finds in this status and move them to `Staging`. This can only happen if the ServiceControl process stops during the above process. Any documents that were already marked will be added to the batch. Any documents that had not yet been marked are ignored and will have to be retried again by the user.

When a bulk retry is issued a background process is started that looks for all of the messages that match its criteria and assign them to a retry batch id (in lots of 1,000). If the process is killed before it is done, the details of what you were trying to retry are gone. Any documents that had already marked for retry will be retried. Any that were not marked for retry will require manual intervention to retry

When ServiceControl starts up, it will generate a `Session ID` GUID. This GUID is stamped onto each new batch as it is created. This is how ServiceControl can tell if a batch is from a previous session and adopt it. Only Batches with a non-current session Id will be adopted by the orphan batch process.

> ## Recovering retry batches

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Recovering retry batches
```

When ServiceControl starts it will look for documents marked with a retry batch id, without a matching retry batch document (i.e. We started making the batch but we never completed it). Retry batches in this state as called "orphaned" because the process that was assembling them has been lost.

> When we "adopt" and orphaned batch, we take over the processing of it. We find all of the messages with the same missing retry batch id and create a retry batch with that id for them. This new retry batch document will then get picked up and processed like any other.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an instance of ServiceControl "adopts" an orphaned batch, it takes over the processing of it. That instance will find all of the messages with the same missing retry batch id and create a retry batch with that id for them. This new retry batch document will then get picked up and processed like any other.
```

> TODO: How is selected which message is part of a retry batch? If that done before the retry batch is created (try to add 1,000 messages, if some are part of another retry batch just skip? Or b, the retry batch itself tried to create FailedMessageRetry documents until either no more messages or it reaches 1,000? Based on line 23 I think the last? )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Staging

> Staging ensures transactional exactly-once processing. Transports that do not support `SendsAtomicWithReceive` strictly would not need staging to prevent more-than-once delivery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Staging reduces the chance of sending a message for retry more than once. Transports that do not support `SendsAtomicWithReceive` strictly would not need staging to prevent more-than-once delivery.
```

When a batch enters this state, it means that failed messages belonging to the batch are being added to a special `staging` queue. This queue is used during `Forwarding` to ensure that messages are sent back to their original destination transactionally (using the transports recieve transaction).

NOTE: Although multiple batches may be in `Staging` or `Forwarding` at a time, these are processed by a single thread ensuring that the rest of the process is serialized. This is important to ensure that only one batch at a time has access to the `staging` queue. Batches in `Staging` will only be processed if there are no batches in `Forwarding`.

If a message fails to be forwarded it is removed from the batch. If the batch contains no messages, then it is marked as complete.

When a batch is selected for staging a new `Staging Id` is generated for it and the list of failed messages belonging to the batch is loaded. At this time, if a message had been snagged by another batch, it gets filtered out.

Each message, one at a time, is dispatched to the `staging` queue. As each message is dispatched:

> 1. It's Raven `Failedmessage` document is updated to reflect that it has entered `RetryIssued` mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The corresponding `Failedmessage` document is updated to reflect that it has entered `RetryIssued` mode.
```

### Staging

Staging ensures transactional exactly-once processing. Transports that do not support `SendsAtomicWithReceive` strictly would not need staging to prevent more-than-once delivery.
When a batch enters this state, it means that failed messages belonging to the batch are being added to a special `staging` queue. This queue is used during `Forwarding` to ensure that messages are sent back to their original destination transactionally (using the transports recieve transaction).

NOTE: Although multiple batches may be in `Staging` or `Forwarding` at a time, these are processed by a single thread ensuring that the rest of the process is serialized. This is important to ensure that only one batch at a time has access to the `staging` queue. Batches in `Staging` will only be processed if there are no batches in `Forwarding`.

If a message fails to be forwarded it is removed from the batch. If the batch contains no messages, then it is marked as complete.

When a batch is selected for staging a new `Staging Id` is generated for it and the list of failed messages belonging to the batch is loaded. At this time, if a message had been snagged by another batch, it gets filtered out.

> TODO: Aren't messages selected during the Marking stage?
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

If there is a message in the `Forwarding` status when ServiceControl starts, then we don't know how many messages there are still in the staging queue to send. To counter this we turn on the satellite in Non-Counting mode. The idea for this is that the satellite will run until the queue is empty. Unfortunately there is nothing built into the Transport abstraction that allows us to query this so SC assumes that if it does not see any new messages from the `staging` queue within 45 seconds then it is empty.

> TODO: What happend when forwarding fails? Transport error, network error? What happens in the edge case then forwarding completes and we crash? Restart and finds an empty stating queue and times out?

Reviewer: This is one benefit of the staging queue. It makes it more likely that if we can reach the broker to receive the message, then we can reach the broker to send it on.

> What happend when forwarding fails? Transport error, network error?

If forwarding fails for a message, then we count it, mark it as unresolved, and remove it from the batch. You should see warnings in the log that look like this:

```
Failed to send UNIQUE-MESSAGE-ID message to DESTINATION for retry. Attempting to revert message status to unresoved so it can be tried again.
```
The error information will be attached.

> What happens in the edge case then forwarding completes and we crash? Restart and finds an empty stating queue and times out?

Yes.

If there is a message in the `Forwarding` status when ServiceControl starts, then we don't know how many messages there are still in the staging queue to send. To counter this we turn on the satellite in Non-Counting mode. The idea for this is that the satellite will run until the queue is empty. Unfortunately there is nothing built into the Transport abstraction that allows us to query this so SC assumes that if it does not see any new messages from the `staging` queue within 45 seconds then it is empty.

If forwarding a specific message fail, then we count it, mark it as unresolved, and remove it from the batch. You should see warnings in the log that look like this with the error information attached:

> Failed to send UNIQUE-MESSAGE-ID message to DESTINATION for retry. Attempting to revert message status to unresoved so it can be tried again.

> Might SC run in the edge case that forwarding completes and immediately crash then after restart it finds an empty staging queue and times out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If forwarding completes and ServiceControl immediately crashes then after restart it finds an empty staging queue and times out.
```

### Done

There is no status to indicate that a batch is `Done`. When the `Forwarding` status is completed, the batch is deleted as it is no longer relevant. Note that each message that was retried as a part of the batch still have a corresponding `FailedMessageRetry/{messageId}` document. This will prevent the message from being retried again.

> Once all batches for a retry operation complete, we add two enties into a retry history document. An "unacknowledged" entry is kept until a user acknowledges the completion of the operation, while the other is used to show users the historic retry operations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once all batches for a retry operation complete, we add two entries into a retry history document. An "unacknowledged" entry is kept until a user acknowledges the completion of the operation, while the other is used to show users the historic retry operations.
```
